# Coinfection & Spatial Scaling 🦠 🗺️

*This repository accompanies the paper presenting the neighbourhood analysis technique for detecting coinfection interactions and will not be updated post publication. If you are looking for the live repository where any subsequent updates will be posted, please see find that  [here](https://github.com/shaunkeegan/coinfection_spatial_scaling).*

*Please click [here](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.06.21.545944v1) to see the preprint.*

# **Overview 📄**

These data were collected in 2012 as part of a broader piece of work exploring the parasite communities of the wood mouse (_Apodomous sylvaticus_). This code base takes input data from trapping grids and calculates neighbourhood prevalence relative to each individual on the grid. It does this by iteratively identifying each individual in the population as the ‘focal’ individual, and each other as a potential neighbour, with a distance to the focal individual calculated. Then neighbourhood prevalence and mean infection burden of the potentially interacting parasite (the nematode _Heligmosomoides polygyrus_) is calculated for each user-defined neighbourhood size around the focal individual. These are then able to be used in statistical models as an explanatory factor for the specified infection state (_Eimeria_ presence/absence or intensity) of all focal individuals.

# Instructions for use 🧑‍🏫

There are three ways to recreate the figures in the paper: 

    1)	from scratch, generating the neighbourhood data files (step #1 below), followed by running the statistical analysis code (step #2) and the plotting code to generate the figures (step #3);
    
    2)	use the previously-generated neighbourhood data files (“DATA -…csv”) and just run the statistical analysis code (step #2) and the plotting code to generate the figures (step #3);
    
    3)	use the previously-generated statistical output files (“STATS - …csv”) and just run the plotting code to generate the figures (step #3).


**Step 1: Open file** `execute.parasite.function.R`. This file takes raw data (described below) and generates neighbourhood data files that includes information on number of neighbours, and their infection statuses, for each focal capture in the raw data set. These neighbourhood data files ("DATA - …csv") are then used for the statistical analyses in step #2 below.

Lines 6 - 22 clears the environment and loads the required data file ("raw data.csv"), helper function files (`exppoints.R`, `make.dist.vector.R`, `prop.on.grid.R`) and package (`gtools`).

Lines 26 - 37 sets up distance matrices and calculates the range of distances to be used as neighbourhood sizes.

Lines 41 - 61 defines the neighbour and focal variables to be used and then prepares the dataframes accordingly.

Lines 65 - 94 defines column names for the output dataframes.

Lines 98 - 106 runs the parasite function across the selected temporal ranges.

Lines 110 - 119 write output files for these runs ("DATA - …csv").



**Step 2: Open file** `run.statistical.analysis.R`. This file runs Bayesian Generalised Linear Mixed Effects Models on the data generated by the file above to determine the effect of neighbour parasites on focal parasites at increasing spatial scales and specified time windows. Outputs are stored in csv files ("STATS - …csv"`) used to generate the plots in step #3 below.  

Line 8 clears the environment.

Line 12 - 22 loads the data output from the neighbourhood analysis generated in the execute.parasite.function.R file ("DATA - …csv").

Line 26 - 28 loads the required helper function file (`model.run.R`) and statistical package (`brms`).

Line 33 sets the labels to be used which is a list of the distances which have been selected.

Lines 42 - 60 selects response and explanatory parasites and variable names.

Lines 65 - 85 runs the appropriate suite of models.

Lines 90 - 136 saves the output files for the models that have been run ("STATS - …csv").



**Step 3: Open file** `combined.plotting.code.R`. This file generates multipanel plots showing _H. polygyrus_ neighbourhood effects on both _E. hungaryensis_ (left-hand column) and _E. apionodes_ (right-hand column) focal infection status (y-axis) against neighbourhood size (x-axis) for the different time windows (panels).  Uses statistical output files (“STATS - …csv”) generated from Step 2. 

Line 8 clears the environment.

Lines 12 - 58 loads the appropriate statistical output files generated in the run.statistical.analysis.R file (“STATS - …csv”).

Lines 64 – 73 creates functions to colour code points, depending whether the 95% CIs cross zero.

Line 78 sets the labels to be used which is a list of the distances which have been selected.

Lines 83 – 84 generate the output pdf with an appropriate name.

Lines 91- 94 sets plotting parameters (layout, margins etc).

Lines 97 – 162 creates a function (`plotfunc`) for creating the paired _E. hungaryensis_ and _E. apionodes_ plots for each time window in turn. 

Lines 166 – 170 calls `plotfunc` for each time window in turn.

Lines 174 - 189 adds a single x-axis label for the whole plot and species labels for the two columns.

Lines 193 – 198 adds an appropriate single y-axis label, depending on the neighbourhood and focal variables.

Line 200 closes the pdf.



# Input Raw Data Structure 📊

The core data, to be used by step #1 above, includes:

•	Animal identifier

•	Temporal data in DD/MM/YYYY format

•	X & Y grid coordinates

•	Animal demographic data

•	Parasitological data


And more specifically:


| Variable Name | Description  |
| :---          | :--- |
| ID            | ID code assigned to animal |
| ID.CapDate    | ID code assigned to animal combined with capture date |
| X             | X coordinates on the grid |
| Y             | X coordinates on the grid |
| Capture.date  | Temporal data in DD/MM/YYYY format |
| Grid          | Grid Designation |
| Year          | Capture Year |
| Sex           | Mouse Sex (M/F/NA) |
| Age           | Mouse Age (Adult/NotAdult/NA) |
| treated.Y.N   | Whether an animal has been treated with the anthelmintic ivermectin (0/1) |
| EhungInt      | Infection intensity of E. hungaryensis |
| EhungInf      | Presence or absence of E. hungaryensis (0/1) |
| EappInt       | Infection intensity of E. apionoides |
| EappInf       | Presence or absence of E. apionoides (0/1)  |
| H.poly.EPG    | Infection intensity of H. polygyrus |
| HpolINF       | Presence or absence of H. polygyrus (0/1)  |






